---
title: Welcome
permalink: wiki/Welcome/
layout: wiki
---

<languages/> <translate> {{\#evt: service=youtube
\|id=<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n9AqNvIbFXo&list=PLybSFICi4UliK17U6rxPneXAyxvmGAe5T&index=4%7Calignment=right>
\|dimensions=320 \|container=frame \|description=Playlist of
performances with Tidal from our [youtube
channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCG5Ynx9mvouuSHYEyxaJ0Cg/playlists)
}}

**TidalCycles** (or 'tidal' for short) is free/open source software,
that allows you to make patterns with code, whether live coding music at
algoraves or composing in the studio.

It includes language for describing flexible (e.g. polyphonic,
polyrhythmic, generative) sequences. It also has an extensive library of
patterning functions, for transforming and combining them.

Tidal is highly composable in that pattern transformations can be easily
combined together, allowing you to quickly create complex patterns from
simple ingredients.

Tidal does not make sound itself, but is designed for use with the
featureful SuperDirt synth, and can control other synths over Open Sound
Control or MIDI. Whether you're using SuperDirt or a synth, every filter
and effect can be patterned and manipulated independently with Tidal
patterns.

Tidal is embedded in the Haskell language, although you don't have to
learn Haskell to learn Tidal - most tidal coders have little or no
experience in software engineering.

# Documentation

Enter the [Userbase](/wiki/Userbase "wikilink") for installation info,
reference material, tutorials and guides!

This website is now a wiki, which means that as well as enjoying these
resources, you can [improve and add to
them](/wiki/Help:How_to_contribute "wikilink").

# "Learning TidalCycles" Course

There's now an online "Learning TidalCycles" course, lead by Alex who
created Tidal. It's based on around pre-recorded videos so you can join
at any time. The [first four
weeks](https://club.tidalcycles.org/t/weeks-1-4-index/395) is now fully
open access, and the second four weeks is available on a
[pay-as-you-feel basis](https://blog.tidalcycles.org/shop/).

![](kofi1.png "kofi1.png")

# Contributing coffee

If you enjoy TidalCycles, please consider helping speed up development
by [contributing coffees](http://ko-fi.com/yaxulive) to Alex! He's put
years into making Tidal, and one-off or regular coffees help speed up
both its development and documentation.

# Related links

-   [TOPLAP - the home of live coding](http://toplap.org/)
-   There's a lot of other fine live coding environments! See the TOPLAP
    [long
    list](https://toplap.org/all-things-live-coding-a-curated-list/) of
    them.
-   [Algorave](http://algorave.com/) - algorithmic dance culture

# Credits

TidalCycles and SuperDirt have been developed with contributions from a
wide range of people - [Tidal
contributors](https://github.com/tidalcycles/Tidal/graphs/contributors)
/ [SuperDirt
contributors](https://github.com/musikinformatik/SuperDirt/graphs/contributors).

TidalCycles was initiated by Alex McLean around 2009 during doctoral
work funded by EPSRC. Alex's ongoing work on Tidal is partly supported
by Ko-Fi contributors and the
[PENELOPE](https://penelope.hypotheses.org/) project (under the Horizon
2020 research and innovation programme of the European Union, grant
agreement No 682711).

TidalCycles has been heavily inspired by the work of many others
including Bernard Bel, Laurie Spiegel and Adrian Ward.

# Meta

-   [Help:How to contribute](/wiki/Help:How_to_contribute "wikilink") to this
    wiki
-   [Ideas for this wiki](/wiki/Ideas_for_this_wiki "wikilink")

</translate>
